i got a question from the audience
asking about democracy and you know what
it's a long
convoluted question and i'm going to try
to give a very simple concise
positive and constructive answer what
this question boils down to
is this why is it that in
so-called mature western democracies
there is so little interest in democracy
itself
in improving democracy in reforming
democracy
in amending the constitution now
you've lived through some exceptions to
the rule haven't you
there's been a whole lot of interest in
gay rights
constitutional amendments for gay
marriage and gay rights
yup that's true oh what else can we
think of abortion
it's been a lot there's been a lot of
interest in abortion but when you look
at
democracy as such when you look at
what an outrageous joke elections
are whether it's in the united states of
america england canada
australia any of these any of these
countries when you look at how
parliament itself works when you look at
how little anyone can do
in canadian parliament if they are not
the prime minister
or one of his direct acolytes you know
members of cabinet working with the
prime minister
indeed even the united states despite
the congressional system where you seem
to have
a country ruled by just one man
and an unbelievably dysfunctional
quasi-democratic
system certainly of course the issues of
corruption and what have you
um in this video i'm not
asking negatively or analytically about
those problems
i'm asking positively and constructively
about the solution and what i
say to you is in a word education
the solution is education and the
current
problem is also excavated by education
because the problem is nobody cares
right the problem isn't democracy the
problem is lack of interest in democracy
the the problem is lack of any positive
interest in reforming democracy and
again we can
we can illustrate this by looking at
exceptions to the rule
you know where people really care about
the future of democracy you know where
they really care
thailand right now
in 2020 in thailand
they look to the east and they're
looking at cambodia
they look to the west they're looking at
myanmar they look to the south they've
got malaysia and indonesia
people in thailand care about democracy
just just a little bit further north
there's china hmm do you want the future
of your country to be more like
china to be more like japan
to be more like western europe it's big
question right now the streets of
bangkok thailand
they're asking how much democracy are
they gonna have you know where people
care
about democracy hong kong
they're not gonna get it but people in
hong kong are willing to stand up and
kill and die
for democracy right now in the year 2020
it's tragic
it's sad but that's the truth they care
we don't
why don't we care why is there so little
interest in democracy
in countries where people feel they have
enough enough democracy uh
you know and just one more one more
example mongolia
mongolia has a great big land border
with russia
and they got people on business coming
back and forth on the train to and from
russia every day
the trains connect mongolia to russia
they got people on the other border
coming back and forth from china
they're looking at russia they're
looking at china they think
we're interested in the future of
democracy
we're interested in not having our
future look like russia
not look like china not look like north
korea
maybe they want the future to look more
like japan maybe like the united states
of america or western europe
they are interested in democracy we are
not and
why of course of course it's our system
of education
aristotle set out this puzzle for us and
then he died
leaving the book incomplete at any rate
the only extant
copy we have of aristotle's politics is
incomplete
maybe there was a complete copy in the
great library of alexandria before it
was burned down
right but aristotle set out this puzzle
for us that in every country
system of education has to correspond to
has to work with
has to work for the constitution of that
country
if you have a democracy you need a
system of education
that prepares people to be good citizens
to be participants
in a democracy if you have a monarchy
you need a system of education that
prepares people
to be good citizens in that monarchy we
still have monarchies today
we have saudi arabia you tell me
do you think the system of education in
saudi arabia is doing a good job
educating and preparing people to be
citizens within saudi arabia to have
freedom of speech
within those limits to influence
to live a life as a publicly responsible
person within that society
right i mean an example would be charity
work i realized that the amount of
democracy in saudi arabia is
close to zero but there are ways people
can take responsibility to be
civic-minded and do something good for
the community
islam is very big on charity work well
are you learning to do that
in the saudi system even if you accept
the constitution of saudi arabia
you can question you can evaluate is the
education system succeeding or failing
in preparing you to be a good citizen of
saudi arabia is the education system
in any given country doing a good job of
preparing you
to be a member of a participant in a
leader in
you know the democratic system in that
country however
much or however little democracy
you may have we have a further problem
because denmark democracies change
dynamically constitutions get rewritten
sometimes every few decades sometimes
every few years and that even happened
in athens
even within aristotle's lifetime okay
constitution gets rewritten again and
again
the number of years between the
draconian laws and the constitution of
solon of athens it's not that many years
you'd be surprised we still have these
words in
in english draconian laws draconian
legislation
we still say reflecting this
constitution that only lasted for a
couple of years
constitutions don't last forever we have
a cultural tradition especially the
united states of america of regarding
the constitution
as if it's something set down once and
for all time like
the pop culture idea of the ten
commandments
moses carried down from the that is not
true about constitutions anywhere
not in the united states but even more
flagrantly not in west germany not in
south korea not in japan
definitely not in canada you know in
most countries constitution has changed
there is an inherently conservative bias
in that your system of education is
never
going to be preparing you to participate
in
the democracy of the future it's only
and always going to be preparing you
to participate in the democracy of the
past at best
the system of education you've got is
preparing you
to participate in democracy as it
was neither as it
is nor as it should be
now in canada i can't even say that
many years ago i saw an interview with
um
the rapper tupac shakur probably some
you can send me the link it's probably
on youtube right now somewhere
and it's tupac complaining that in his
high school education
he didn't learn to take a complaint to
parliament he didn't learn to take a
complaint to city hall
he didn't learn to participate in the
democratic system anyway he didn't learn
to fight for his rights
or just to even dispute some zoning
regulation some relatively minor
legal kerfuffle at city hall or
state senate or whatever he didn't learn
how any of that works or how to
participate how to be a good citizen
instead he says i learned how to play
volleyball right he wasn't the most
articulate guy and as i recall he was a
teenager when he gave that interview
right but it's a sincere and
hard-hitting
complaint what we are teaching people
in high school doesn't prepare them to
be citizens and what we're not teaching
them
right it highlights it it's the basis of
this whole problem this person's writing
in
terms of why is there no interest in
direct democracy or even making
parliamentary democracy
work in any of these countries people
have the delusion
that they have enough democracy but it
is largely
a delusion predicated on ignorance so
it would be one thing if we could reform
the system of education
so that people and democracies really
were prepared
to be responsible citizens to be
participants and to even be leaders in
democracy we don't have that yet but
there's a further challenge
i want an education system that prepares
you not to participate in democracy as
it is
but in democracy as it should be
afghanistan they have a system of
democracy
it's deeply flawed it's riddled with
corruption
and inefficiencies and men with machine
guns have to guard
every ballot box against terrorist
attacks and taliban a lot of problems
all right if you're designing the system
of education
in afghanistan today in 2020 are you
going to teach people
how to participate in democracy as it
actually is
or as it ought to be as it should be
and as it quite possibly could be within
just 10 years
10 years goes by pretty quick but what
you're educating people about in high
school today
or university day it could be reality
just 10 years from now and in a country
like afghanistan that's not
reckless optimism like okay here's how
to participate
in in the elections not that we had four
years ago
but that we should have four years from
now right
that's reasonable it's reasonable and
again a situation as stark and
terrifying
as afghanistan a situation like mongolia
a situation like thailand
are you educating people for the
democracy they already have
or for the democracy they ought to have
and they ought to be equipped
to demand right again
in a country like canada we don't even
have a system of education
that explains to you how system
democracy already works
anyone who takes a moment to glance at
how the elections
actually work which people are
interested in now for five minutes
in 2020 because of the election of
donald trump and it's been a big
disaster
20 years ago the year 2000 elections
that swept
uh george w bush into power there was a
brief moment
where people stopped and took five
minutes to read the wikipedia article
for how elections actually work in the
united states america i'm like
huh this doesn't make any sense
and then what happened nothing
there was no constitutional amendment
these problems
it's not just reasonable to have a
constitutional amendment it's reasonable
to tear up the constitution and write a
new one it's reasonable to start with a
blank
sheet of paper and start making laws
that actually work so a man is choked to
death
on the streets in the united states of
america and for five minutes
the whole world pays attention to this
very strange accretion
of laws and standards of practices and
expectations
of how the police work for five minutes
it's so fleeting
people care it's it's the same with you
know
aircraft crashes when there's a disaster
in the aircraft industry for just
five minutes people are learning the
details how the black box works how the
you know the government ministry that
inspects it for safety works and who's
responsible
and they move on and they forget right
there's been no
sincere interest in reforming democracy
and
i don't just mean the united states of
america supplies to canada
england really all the mature western
democracies
there was a spark of interest in france
with the chilejone
and i'll just mention again i've said it
before it was a really weird conspiracy
in the media to suppress the democratic
aspect of the shiloh zhang because they
were explicitly calling
for constitutional amendments and
reforms to make democracy and france
more democratic to have more direct
democracy they really wanted change in a
meaningful way it wasn't just a set of
protests
about gasoline prices right
um public attention
is sparked in this very fleeting and
shallow way
by a disaster of this kind but the
pattern that's held
true during my lifetime is that soon
enough
that attention dissipates there is no
reform
there is no progress towards a more
perfect democracy or even just a more
more adequate democracy all right
now if we look at the two halves of the
equation that aristotle
set out for us right so there's the the
constitution
and the system of education question i
want to ask you is which one is going to
change first
and which one can you change which one
can you make a difference in now and in
the next five years
all right from my perspective both of
them have to be completely demolished
i mean i'm i'm dead serious when i say
that the university system of education
we have in the western world right now
needs to be torn down and in tearing
down
the university system you cause a
disruption throughout society at all
levels
because we live in a society where most
rights
ranks privileges and sources of income
correspond to credentials
that are handed out by universities and
other educational
institutions i mean ultimately getting
your driver's license comes from an
educational institution
although not a university right who is a
surgeon
and who is not who is qualified to fly
an airplane and who is not who is
allowed to be a stockbroker
and who is not who is an architect and
who is not who is a lawyer
and who is not who has to pay a lawyer
as opposed to being paid
to get even the simplest thing done in a
court of law right
all these things are controlled and
defined by your system of education so
if we're calling
for a total reform of education to
demolish the establishment we now have
it's not a minor
revolution that i'm that i'm calling for
right and the
constitutions that we have in the
western world they need to be torn up
and rewritten but it's also fair to say
that if we tear up the constitution the
united states of america today
or of canada today right and start from
a blank sheet of paper
you know you know how little engagement
how little interest how little
enthusiasm there's to the public
right you know you're not going to get a
great or good or even
passable constitution to replace the old
one just
look at the quality of the intellectual
response at all levels
to police brutality in 2020 look at the
astounding stupidity of the defund the
police
movement and of what's come out of blm
black lives matter
there aren't new ideas here and let me
let me just be let me just be clear
you need new ideas that are so good
that are so much fundamentally better
than the old ideas
that they make those old ideas obsolete
that's what we're looking for we're not
looking for new window dressing new
decoration
not for something that's just fun just
just decoratively better on the surface
right
we're looking for fundamental
innovations fundamental improvements or
rather what i mean to say is
nobody is looking for fundamental
innovations nobody is interested
in any fundamental improvements and that
is the rot at the basis of our system
of education which is most obviously
evident
in political science education political
philosophy politics
as an area of education than the knock
on effects that that has in the system
now i'm 42 years old
within my lifetime police brutality is
not the only
example of this so there has been a
critique of police brutality and i'm
saying there's an appalling lack
of new ideas and that this shows the
weakness of our education
system that shows how poorly we're
prepared to actually tear up the
constitution and write a new and better
constitution i don't mean me personally
i mean us on the level of thousands or
millions of people whoever's going to
participate in this
you know okay what
you ever heard of neoliberalism
have you looked at the critique of
neoliberalism in the last
30 years again in this sense
the paucity of new ideas is just
appalling
it's just shocking you know yes of
course i can't say there are
zero ideas if you if you rake through
the the you know
um mountains of paper that have been
presented at academic
conferences about neoliberalism but but
in this sense
the same way there are now conferences
talking about police brutality in 2020
and
you know giving different left-wing
watchwords about uh
you know defunding the police and what
have you no
neoliberalism was never confronted with
a fundamentally new fundamentally better
fundamentally innovative idea that could
replace neoliberalism
and that would make it obsolete that was
so much better
that you know nobody's talking about
going back to the apple ii
nobody's talking about going back to the
apple lisa because the new computers
apple is making
makes them totally obsolete nobody's
typing back to the iphone one
because they got the iphone 11 or the
iphone 12 now whatever we're up to
you know that's the nature of
obsolescence
all right it makes what was rendered
obsolete seem
laughable by comparison it's not just a
change in window dress we're talking
about
big fundamental steps forward now at the
same time
anyone who just stops and looks at the
reality of police procedure
the reality of how elections function
the reality of how parliaments function
we'll say
there's so much outrageously wrong with
us there's so much laughably wrong that
a high school student could see oh this
is wrong this is the solution oh this is
a bad way to organize parliament here
i'll write down some rules tear up the
ovals this will be better
like there's so much wrong that
10 or 12 idiots could come together and
get organized
and come up with a better set of rules
and procedures
very briefly in canada we have the grand
tradition of
question period it's the only democratic
thing
about the system we have in canada which
is otherwise just a system of elected
democracy
during question period the elected
representatives who do not
form the government in power stand up
and ask questions
and then they don't get any answers and
if you really pitch a fit and get snide
and point out that the government has
failed to answer your answer to answer
your questions
they will say back to you that's why
it's called question period
not answer period it's such an obvious
gaping hole in our constitution
obviously you could write a better
constitution that just says yeah when
the government is asked a question by
another
member of parliament they have to answer
and they have to answer within a certain
number of days and they have to make a
sincere effort to give the the true and
honest answer
you can imagine filling in some fine
print in case there's you're actually
exposing secrets that would
lose people's lives in the battlefield
or something you know to what extent
secrecy can vote
of course question period needs to have
a corresponding
answering period and we have these kinds
of laughably obvious
gaps in how the system works today that
nobody's ever thought to sit down and
fill and yes in case you didn't know in
canada
uh our equivalent to the senate is not
elected
we have an unelected senate so does
england where it's called the house of
lords you know
and by the way it's not just called the
lord's temporal but also the lord's
immortal
they have unelected representatives of
religious groups in their house of lords
they're all these weird accretions of
what were short-term decisions sometimes
made in the dark ages sometimes made in
the renaissance
sometimes made just a hundred years ago
or just 50 years ago short-term
decisions that seemed to make sense at
the time
but what they add up to as they ossify
and remain in place
for centuries is a wildly irrational
wildly dysfunctional system that utterly
lacks the dynamism of politics in taiwan
of politics in japan of politics in
thailand of politics in mongolia
in relatively young democracies that
started
with a blank sheet of paper after world
war ii unencumbered by these traditions
so yes
in this sense as long as they're
speaking analytically
and destructively i see the positive
potential
of people getting rid of this
you know tradition the accumulated
tradition
of british empire parliamentary
democracy that just getting rid of it
would be a great accomplishment yes i i
can talk about that negatively but now
when we turn to talking about it
constructively and positively
that's when i say whoa we'll wait look
at our system of education
look at the appalling stupidity of what
we've managed to produce in terms of new
ideas and innovation
whether that's in response to
neoliberalism globalization another
great
word that brought together thousands of
pens with phds
attached to them writing out reams of
paper you know who
all these theories about globalization
go through them you try to find
a new idea that meets this criterion a
new idea that would make
the old idea obsolete you know uh
all of the most fundamental and
important questions of government
have gone unasked and unanswered since
the end
of world war ii and why is that you know
my answer is to point back to aristotle
and say tragically
tragically it's because of this
relationship between
the constitution and our system of
education
what we need is a system of education
that doesn't prepare us
to plow the fields as silent
peons in a system of feudalism
you know we don't need a system of
education that prepares us
to be powerless people in a society
dominated
by you know an unelected class of
lawyers
and government employed bureaucrats and
captains of industry
you know in corporate america or the
leaders of corporations in canada
that collude with government we don't
need a
system of education that prepares us to
be de-politicized
consumers in a bureaucratic
technocratic society that in my words
lacks lacks any kind of
lacks any kind of polity whatsoever you
know
what we need is a system of education
that protect prepares us
to participate not in democracy as it
actually is
but democracy as it should be